Update podman-generate-systemd man page (#5597)
containers/libpod: docs/source/markdown/podman-generate-systemd.1.md

% podman-generate-systemd(1)

## NAME

> podman\-generate\-systemd - Generate systemd unit file(s) for a container or pod. Not supported for the remote client

Reviewer: Can we add a trailing dot?

Author: Fixed.

**--new**

Create a new container via podman-run instead of starting an existing one.  This option relies on container configuration files, which may not map directly to podman CLI flags; please review the generated output carefully before placing in production.
Since we use systemd `Type=forking` service, using this option will force the container run with the detached param `-d`.

> Note: Generating systemd unit files with `--new` flag is not yet supported for Pods.

Reviewer 2: nit "Pods." -> "pods."

## Examples

> ### Generate unit files

Reviewer: The man pages render three and four `#`s the same. I suggest to remove this heading and remove one `#` for all heading below.

If you want to check out the man pages, you can do `make docs` and do a `man docs/build/man/$page.md`

#### Generate and print a systemd unit file for a container

> Generates  systemd unit file for container running nginx with an *always* restart policy and 1-second timeout to stdout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generate systemd unit file for container running nginx with an *always* restart policy and a 1-second timeout to stdout.
```

Reviewer 2: And further add to @vrotheberg: "Generate a systemd unit file for a container ..."

 The `--new` flag generates systemd unit files that create and remove containers at service start and stop commands (see ExecStartPre and ExecStopPost service actions). Such unit files are not tied to a single machine and can easily be shared and used on other machines.

```
$ sudo podman generate systemd --new --files --name bb310a0780ae
# container-busy_moser.service
# autogenerated by Podman 1.8.3
# Fri Apr  3 09:40:47 EDT 2020

[Unit]
Description=Podman container-busy_moser.service
Documentation=man:podman-generate-systemd(1)
Wants=network.target
After=network-online.target

[Service]
Environment=PODMAN_SYSTEMD_UNIT=%n
Restart=on-failure
ExecStartPre=/usr/bin/rm -f %t/%n-pid %t/%n-cid
ExecStart=/usr/local/bin/podman run --conmon-pidfile %t/%n-pid --cidfile %t/%n-cid --cgroups=no-conmon -d -dit alpine
ExecStop=/usr/local/bin/podman stop --ignore --cidfile %t/%n-cid -t 10
ExecStopPost=/usr/local/bin/podman rm --ignore -f --cidfile %t/%n-cid
PIDFile=%t/%n-pid
KillMode=none
Type=forking

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target default.target
```

### Generate systemd unit files for a pod with two simple alpine containers

>  Note that the generated pod service internally references the generated container unit files. Hence `systemctl` should only be used on the pod unit and one should not start or stop containers individually via `systemctl`, as they are managed by the pod service along with the internal infra-container. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Note `systemctl` should only be used on the pod unit and one should not start or stop containers individually via `systemctl`, as they are managed by the pod service along with the internal infra-container. 
```

WantedBy=multi-user.target default.target
```

#### Generating systemd unit file for a container with `--new` flag

>  The `--new` flag basically generates systemd unit files that create and remove containers at service start and stop commands [Reffered by ExecStartPre and ExecStopPost service actions]. Such unit files are not tied to a single machine and can easily be shared and used on other machines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 The `--new` flag generates systemd unit files that create and remove containers at service start and stop commands (see ExecStartPre and ExecStopPost service actions). Such unit files are not tied to a single machine and can easily be shared and used on other machines.
```

```
$ sudo podman generate systemd --new --files --name bb310a0780ae
# container-busy_moser.service
# autogenerated by Podman 1.8.3
# Fri Apr  3 09:40:47 EDT 2020

[Unit]
Description=Podman container-busy_moser.service
Documentation=man:podman-generate-systemd(1)
Wants=network.target
After=network-online.target

[Service]
Environment=PODMAN_SYSTEMD_UNIT=%n
Restart=on-failure
ExecStartPre=/usr/bin/rm -f %t/%n-pid %t/%n-cid
ExecStart=/usr/local/bin/podman run --conmon-pidfile %t/%n-pid --cidfile %t/%n-cid --cgroups=no-conmon -d -dit alpine
ExecStop=/usr/local/bin/podman stop --ignore --cidfile %t/%n-cid -t 10
ExecStopPost=/usr/local/bin/podman rm --ignore -f --cidfile %t/%n-cid
PIDFile=%t/%n-pid
KillMode=none
Type=forking

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target default.target
```

> #### Generate systemd unit files for a pod with two simple alpine containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Generate systemd unit files for a pod with two simple alpine containers
```

Just to be consistent with other headings

>  Note that these container services cannot be started or stopped individually via `systemctl`; they are managed by the pod service. You can still use `systemctl status` or journalctl to examine them.

Reviewer: The services can be stopped (or) started via `systemctl` but they really should not. I believe to understand where you're pointing and suggest to instead explain that the dependencies inside the pod are reflected in the generated unit files: one unit for the pod (infra container) and one per container. As the pod is considered as a unit, `systemctl` should only be used on the pod unit but not on the container units.

Author: I have added more details referencing the above comment PTAL?

Also, This was an old reference I just refactored the heading is it out of context with the note tag added? Or is it good? 
Ref: https://github.com/containers/libpod/pull/5597/commits/e0131d908f954caa845d574b6b9d0e2361c3f4cd#diff-8faae638e5bcbc89b51451a155f1db92L67

272d2813c7988ff26ef3d9386a113e001604150442d1184de74d31d6f02d6bb1
$ sudo podman create --pod systemd-pod ngix top
927aadd2d18ece4adbdf8037866d8e146f4f7bbcd7b47029ef27df722195f60a
$ sudo podman generate systemd --files --name systemd-pod
/home/user/pod-systemd-pod.service
/home/user/container-awesome_banach.service
$ sudo cp pod-systemd-pod.service container-awesome_banach.service /usr/lib/systemd/user
$ systemctl enable pod-systemd-pod.service
$ sudo podman pod ps
POD ID         NAME          STATUS    CREATED          # OF CONTAINERS   INFRA ID
272d2813c798   systemd-pod   Created   29 minutes ago   2                 6c5d116f4bbe
$ systemctl start pod-systemd-pod.service
$ sudo podman pod ps
POD ID         NAME          STATUS    CREATED          # OF CONTAINERS   INFRA ID
272d2813c798   systemd-pod   Running   29 minutes ago   2                 6c5d116f4bbe
$ podman pod ps # 0 Number of pods on user thread.
$ systemctl stop pod-systemd-pod.service
$ sudo podman pod ps
POD ID         NAME          STATUS   CREATED          # OF CONTAINERS   INFRA ID
272d2813c798   systemd-pod   Exited   29 minutes ago   2                 6c5d116f4bbe
```

> Create systemd unit files for a pod with one simple alpine containers. And Use the generated service file to modify the pod status as a non root uuser. Note: We are not using 'sudo' with our podman commands hence to do any modifications using the .service the systemctl should point to the current user be using --user flag.

Reviewer 2: "alpine containers" -> "alpine container"

Reviewer 2: I'd drop "And" and just stick with "Use" to start the second sentence.  If you keep the "And", lower case the "Use".

Reviewer 2: Suggest:  "Note: We are not using 'sudo' with our Podman commands, hence to do any modification using the .service file the systemctl should point to the current user by using the --user flag."

Author: Fixed the old typos. @TomSweeneyRedHat PTAL now.

0815c7b8e7f5eb6ff637f8f3a61f2072b6cab7591ad663617ee7a1309dfbe382
$ podman create --pod systemd-pod alpine top
89967cfd0fbba19a6b8ec9c9c16ed698971338c4ed3d2982540e0f0db8e0d1f9
$ podman generate systemd --files --name systemd-pod
/home/user/pod-systemd-pod.service
/home/user/container-reverent_mahavira.service
$ sudo cp pod-systemd-pod.service container-reverent_mahavira.service /usr/lib/systemd/user
$ systemctl --user enable pod-systemd-pod.service
$ podman pod ps
POD ID         NAME          STATUS    CREATED          # OF CONTAINERS   INFRA ID
0815c7b8e7f5   systemd-pod   Created   29 minutes ago   2                 6c5d116f4bbe
$ systemctl --user start pod-systemd-pod.service
$ podman pod ps
POD ID         NAME          STATUS    CREATED          # OF CONTAINERS   INFRA ID
0815c7b8e7f5   systemd-pod   Running   29 minutes ago   2                 6c5d116f4bbe
$ sudo podman ps
CONTAINER ID  IMAGE  COMMAND  CREATED  STATUS  PORTS  NAMES
$ systemctl --user stop pod-systemd-pod.service
$ podman pod ps
POD ID         NAME          STATUS   CREATED          # OF CONTAINERS   INFRA ID
0815c7b8e7f5   systemd-pod   Exited   29 minutes ago   2                 6c5d116f4bbe
```
## SEE ALSO

> podman(1), [podman-container(1)](podman-container.1.md), systemctl(1), systemd.unit(5), systemd.service(5)

Reviewer: I think that man pages cannot resolve such links.

```suggestion
podman(1), podman-container(1), systemctl(1), systemd.unit(5), systemd.service(5)
```

Reviewer 3: The question is whether this compiles correctly into nroff or not, if it does, this would be kind of nice in markdown since it would become an active link.

Reviewer: Valid point! I just checked and it's correctly rendered (i.e., `podman-container(1)`) in the compiled man page.

If we want that, it would be nice to add it to `podman(1)` as well to be consistent.

Reviewer 3: Yes, and then we could move to do this all over the man pages...  But only podman(1) for this PR.

Author: @vrothberg thank you for feedback.  I will update the hyperlink ```podman(1)``` working on adding use cases for ```--new``` flag and installation of units. Though quite not sure with enabling lingering for rootless users i read about it and write some appropriate examples

Reviewer: Great, thanks a lot, @sujil02! Feel free to ping me on IRC or Slack if you have questions. Or just comment here, as you prefer :)

WantedBy=multi-user.target default.target
```

Installation of generated systemd unit files.

> Podman generated unit files include an `[Install]` section, which carries installation information for the unit. It is used by the enable and disable commands of the systemctl(1) during installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Podman generated unit files include an `[Install]` section, which carries installation information for the unit. It is used by the enable and disable commands of systemctl(1) during installation.
```

> Once you have generated the systemd unit file. Copy the generated systemd file to ```/usr/lib/systemd/system``` for installing as a root user and to ```/usr/lib/systemd/user``` for installing it as a non-root user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have generated the systemd unit file, you can copy the generated systemd file to ```/usr/lib/systemd/system``` for installing as a root user and to ```/usr/lib/systemd/user``` for installing it as a non-root user.
```

Reviewer: Copying to `/usr/lib/systemd/user` requires root privileges which defeats the rootless purpose. Instead, we should recommend `$HOME/.config/systemd/user/`.

Author: Agreed. Fixed it.

> Enable the copied one or more units. This will create a set of symlinks, as encoded in the "[Install]" sections of the indicated unit files.

Reviewer: Delete this line. It doesn't really add information in a how-to context.

Author: Agreed. removed.

> Note: Coping the unit to ```/usr/lib/systemd/system``` and enabling it marks the unit to be automatically started at boot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: Coping a unit to ```/usr/lib/systemd/system``` and enabling it marks the unit to be automatically started at boot.
```

Reviewer: What about user services? Those require lingering, and I believe that's the right place to mention.

Author: I have added the details with enabling lingering and installing unit files as a user. @vrothberg PTAL now.

```
# Copy and enable all the generated systemd files.

$ sudo cp pod-systemd-pod.service container-great_payne.service /usr/lib/systemd/system
$ systemctl enable pod-systemd-po.service
Created symlink /etc/systemd/system/multi-user.target.wants/pod-systemd-po.service → /usr/lib/systemd/system/pod-systemd-po.service.
Created symlink /etc/systemd/system/default.target.wants/pod-systemd-po.service → /usr/lib/systemd/system/pod-systemd-po.service.
$ systemctl is-enabled pod-systemd-po.service
enabled
```

> Generated .service file can be used to control the status of the pod and the underlying containers once they are enabled. Since these service files where not generated with `--new` operations with systemctl will modify the same pod|container.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, missed these earlier.  "Generated .service" -> "The generated .service"  also "where not generated" -> "were not generated"

> Generated .service file can be used to control the status of the pod and the underlying containers once they are enabled. Since these service files where not generated with `--new` operations with systemctl will modify the same pod|container.

Reviewer: I suggest deleting this line. Systemctl can only start and stop a pod/container and that's what the entire doc is about.

Author: By this line, i wanted to point out that if a unit file is not created with the --new flag modifications using systemctl and cli will impact the same instances of pod | container and u can use one an other. Should I still remove the line?

Reviewer: I think so, yes. I suggest following the proposed structure (https://github.com/containers/libpod/pull/5597#pullrequestreview-387997068) which should make all differences clear.

Author: Done.

Create and enable systemd unit files for a pod using the above examples as references. Since systemctl defaults to using the root user, all the changes using the systemctl can be seen by appending sudo to the podman cli commands.

```
$ sudo podman pod ps
POD ID         NAME          STATUS    CREATED          # OF CONTAINERS   INFRA ID
272d2813c798   systemd-pod   Created   29 minutes ago   2                 6c5d116f4bbe
$ systemctl start pod-systemd-pod.service
$ sudo podman pod ps
POD ID         NAME          STATUS    CREATED          # OF CONTAINERS   INFRA ID
272d2813c798   systemd-pod   Running   29 minutes ago   2                 6c5d116f4bbe
$ podman pod ps # 0 Number of pods on user thread.
$ systemctl stop pod-systemd-pod.service
$ sudo podman pod ps
POD ID         NAME          STATUS   CREATED          # OF CONTAINERS   INFRA ID
272d2813c798   systemd-pod   Exited   29 minutes ago   2                 6c5d116f4bbe
```

> Use the generated service file to modify the pod status as a non root user. Note: We are not using 'sudo' with our podman commands hence to do any modifications using the .service the systemctl should point to the current user by using --user flag.

Reviewer 2: dropped a "file" here.  ".service the systemctl" -> ".service file, the systemctl"

Author: Fixed

WantedBy=multi-user.target default.target
```

> Creating systemd unit file for a pod with `--new` flag

Reviewer: Can we make this a new sub-section with `###`? It will help finding it when skimming the man page.

> Creating systemd unit file for a pod with `--new` flag

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating systemd unit file for a container with `--new` flag
```

Pods are not yet supported.

Reviewer: Can you add a note to `--new` in the OPTIONS section that pods are not yet supported?

> As its seen the generated unit files with `--new` flag has ExecStartPre and ExecStopPost service actions. ExecStartPre makes sure that each time the service is started it deletes any old reference left and then spins up a new instance. ExecStopPost removes the relevant instances after services are stopped.

Reviewer: I think that's a bit complicated. Use simpler sentences, for example:

"The `--new` flag generates systemd unit files that create and remove containers at service start and stop. Such unit files are not tied to a single machine and can easily be shared with and used on other machines."

The focus is shifted from describing the output to describing how it can be used.

Author: done.

```
$ sudo podman generate systemd --new --files --name bb310a0780ae
# container-busy_moser.service

> # autogenerated by Podman 1.8.3-dev

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# autogenerated by Podman 1.8.3
```

# Fri Apr  3 09:40:47 EDT 2020

[Unit]
Description=Podman container-busy_moser.service
Documentation=man:podman-generate-systemd(1)
Wants=network.target
After=network-online.target

[Service]
Environment=PODMAN_SYSTEMD_UNIT=%n
Restart=on-failure
ExecStartPre=/usr/bin/rm -f %t/%n-pid %t/%n-cid
ExecStart=/usr/local/bin/podman run --conmon-pidfile %t/%n-pid --cidfile %t/%n-cid --cgroups=no-conmon -d -dit alpine
ExecStop=/usr/local/bin/podman stop --ignore --cidfile %t/%n-cid -t 10
ExecStopPost=/usr/local/bin/podman rm --ignore -f --cidfile %t/%n-cid
PIDFile=%t/%n-pid
KillMode=none
Type=forking

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target default.target
```

> ### Installation of generated systemd unit file|s.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Installation of generated systemd unit files
```

Podman generated unit files include an `[Install]` section, which carries installation information for the unit. It is used by the enable and disable commands of systemctl(1) during installation.

Once you have generated the systemd unit file, you can copy the generated systemd file to ```/usr/lib/systemd/system``` for installing as a root user and to ```$HOME/.config/systemd/user ``` for installing it as a non-root user. Now, Enable the copied one or more units using `systemctl enable`.

> Note: Coping a unit to ```/usr/lib/systemd/system``` and enabling it marks the unit to be automatically started at boot.

Reviewer: What about non-root? Those will be started at login.

Author: Updated for non-root as well.

```
# Copy and enable all the generated systemd files.

> $ sudo cp pod-systemd-pod.service container-great_payne.service /usr/lib/systemd/system

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ sudo cp pod-systemd-pod.service /usr/lib/systemd/system
```

Author: The goal here was to point out to copy both (pod, container) generated files. I have added some pre-steps to this line. Have a look, better?

$ systemctl enable pod-systemd-po.service
Created symlink /etc/systemd/system/multi-user.target.wants/pod-systemd-po.service → /usr/lib/systemd/system/pod-systemd-po.service.
Created symlink /etc/systemd/system/default.target.wants/pod-systemd-po.service → /usr/lib/systemd/system/pod-systemd-po.service.
$ systemctl is-enabled pod-systemd-po.service
enabled
```

> To run the user services placed in ~/.config/systemd/user/ on first login of that user, execute

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run the user services placed in `$HOME/.config/systemd/user/` on first login of that user, execute
```

Otherwise, only `/.config/...` is displayed in the man page.

Author: Fixed.

```
$ systemctl --user enable <.service>
```
The systemd user instance is killed after the last session of the user is closed. One can keep the systemd user instance running even after user logs out by enabling `lingering` using

```
$ loginctl enable-linger <username>
```

> ### Use `systemctl` to perform operations on generated installed unit file|s.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Use `systemctl` to perform operations on generated installed unit files
```

Reviewer: This section is still very hard to read. It references previous example and also covers root and rootless which makes it hard to comprehend and follow.

I suggest to give one short example for rootless:
- systemctl --user start ...
- podman ps (we see it running)
- systemctl --user stop ...
- podman ps (container is removed)

Author: Done. eliminated the extra section and made it clearer.

Create and enable systemd unit files for a pod using the above examples as references. Since systemctl defaults to using the root user, all the changes using the systemctl can be seen by appending sudo to the podman cli commands.

```
$ sudo podman pod ps
POD ID         NAME          STATUS    CREATED          # OF CONTAINERS   INFRA ID
272d2813c798   systemd-pod   Created   29 minutes ago   2                 6c5d116f4bbe
$ systemctl start pod-systemd-pod.service
$ sudo podman pod ps
POD ID         NAME          STATUS    CREATED          # OF CONTAINERS   INFRA ID
272d2813c798   systemd-pod   Running   29 minutes ago   2                 6c5d116f4bbe
$ podman pod ps # 0 Number of pods on user thread.
$ systemctl stop pod-systemd-pod.service
$ sudo podman pod ps
POD ID         NAME          STATUS   CREATED          # OF CONTAINERS   INFRA ID
272d2813c798   systemd-pod   Exited   29 minutes ago   2                 6c5d116f4bbe
```

> Use the generated service file to restart the pod as a non root user. Note: We are not using 'sudo' with our podman commands hence to do any modifications using the .service file, the systemctl should point to the current user by using --user flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the generated service file to restart the pod as a non-root user. Note that non-root users need to use the `--user` flag when interacting with systemctl.
```

Author: Done.

WantedBy=multi-user.target default.target
```

### Installation of generated systemd unit files.

> Podman generated unit files include an `[Install]` section, which carries installation information for the unit. It is used by the enable and disable commands of systemctl(1) during installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Podman-generated unit files include an `[Install]` section, which carries installation information for the unit. It is used by the enable and disable commands of systemctl(1) during installation.
```

> Once you have generated the systemd unit file, you can copy the generated systemd file to ```/usr/lib/systemd/system``` for installing as a root user and to ```$HOME/.config/systemd/user ``` for installing it as a non-root user. Now, Enable the copied one or more units using `systemctl enable`.

Reviewer 2: Drop the "Now," at the start of the second sentence.

Reviewer 2: "copied one or more units" -> "copied unit file or files"

> Note: Coping a unit to ```/usr/lib/systemd/system``` and enabling it marks the unit to be automatically started at boot. And smillarly, coping a unit to ```$HOME/.config/systemd/user ``` and enabling it marks the unit to be automatically started on user login.

Reviewer 2: unit -> unit file  through out.  Ditto units -> unit files

```
# Generated systemd files.
$ podman pod create --name systemd-pod
$ podman create --pod systemd-pod alpine top
$ podman generate systemd --files --name systemd-pod

# Copy all the generated files.

$ sudo cp pod-systemd-pod.service container-great_payne.service /usr/lib/systemd/system
$ systemctl enable pod-systemd-po.service
Created symlink /etc/systemd/system/multi-user.target.wants/pod-systemd-po.service → /usr/lib/systemd/system/pod-systemd-po.service.
Created symlink /etc/systemd/system/default.target.wants/pod-systemd-po.service → /usr/lib/systemd/system/pod-systemd-po.service.
$ systemctl is-enabled pod-systemd-po.service
enabled
```
To run the user services placed in `$HOME/.config/systemd/user/` on first login of that user, enable the service with --user flag.

```
$ systemctl --user enable <.service>
```

> The systemd user instance is killed after the last session of the user is closed. One can keep the systemd user instance running even after user logs out by enabling `lingering` using

Reviewer 2: "of the user" -> "for the user"

Reviewer 2: Second sentence to -> "The systemd user instance can be kept running ever after the user logs out ..."

```
$ loginctl enable-linger <username>
```
### Use `systemctl` to perform operations on generated installed unit files.

> Create and enable systemd unit files for a pod using the above examples as references and use `systemctl` to perform operations.

Reviewer 2: references -> reference

> Since systemctl defaults to using the root user, all the changes using the systemctl can be seen by appending sudo to the podman cli commands. To perform `systemctl` actions as a non-root user we have to use the `--user` flag when interacting with `systemctl`.

Reviewer 2: remove "we have to"

```

Create a simple alpine container and generate the systemd unit file with `--new` flag.
Enable the service and control operations using the systemctl commands.

Note: When starting the container using `systemctl start` rather than altering the already running container it spins up a "new" container with similar configuration.

```
# Enable the service.

$ sudo podman ps -a
CONTAINER ID  IMAGE                            COMMAND  CREATED        STATUS     PORTS  NAMES
bb310a0780ae  docker.io/library/alpine:latest  /bin/sh  2 minutes ago  Created           busy_moser
$ sudo systemctl start container-busy_moser.service
$ sudo podman ps -a
CONTAINER ID  IMAGE                            COMMAND  CREATED        STATUS            PORTS      NAMES
772df2f8cf3b  docker.io/library/alpine:latest  /bin/sh  1 second ago   Up 1 second ago              distracted_albattani
bb310a0780ae  docker.io/library/alpine:latest  /bin/sh  3 minutes ago  Created                      busy_moser
```
## SEE ALSO
[podman(1)](podman.1.md), [podman-container(1)](podman-container.1.md), systemctl(1), systemd.unit(5), systemd.service(5)

## HISTORY

> March 2020, Updated details and added usecase to use generated .service files as root and non-root, by Sujil Shah (sushah at redhat dot com)

Reviewer 2: April
